---
id: cli-sudo-apt
summary: Find your way around your instance from the command line. Learn to use admin privileges and install and maintain software
categories: Beginner
tags: 
difficulty: 1
status: draft
feedback_url: https://github.com/JustBerkhout/nectar-tutorials/issues
published: 2019-08-05
author: Just Berkhout <just.berkhout@utas.edu.au>


---

# Command line, sudo and apt

## Overview

Duration: 2:00

In this tutorial you'll learn some of the basics of the command line, navigating the filesystem on your instance and maintaining software on your instance.

You'll learn the bare essentials, that will help you get started and you'll be able to complete our tutorials. There are loads of resources across the web to help you learn this in much more depth and detail. One resource that we find worth mentioning is [the Unix Shell](https://swcarpentry.github.io/shell-novice/) over at [Software Carpentry](https://software-carpentry.org/).

### What you'll need

- A running Nectar instance 
- [Terminal](https://support.ehelp.edu.au/support/solutions/articles/6000223964-terminal-software) software.

### What you'll learn

- Navigation of your instance file system
- Elevating to use system administrator privileges
- Installing and maintaining software



## Basic file system actions

Duration: 12:00

### `home` directory 

When you connect to an instance using `ssh`you typically enter into the *home*-directory of the user account you are connecting with. Your *command prompt* usually reflects your location in the file system. In this context the tilde (`~`) is used to indicate your *home*-directory, and you can make the full directory that you are currently in visible using the `pwd`-command (**p**rint **w**orking **d**irectory).

See if you can recognise the above four statements in the session transcript below:

```bash
me@localmachine:~$ ssh ubuntu@myinstance
ubuntu@myinstance:~$ pwd
/home/ubuntu
```

To show the files and subdirectories that you may have in your home directory you can use the `ls` command.

```bash
ubuntu@myinstance:~$ ls
file1.txt  file2.dat  file3.log
```

If nothing shows for you after running the `ls`-command, there aren't any files in your current directory. This makes for a poor demo of the `ls`-command, so lets create some files and directories, and then try again. 

### Create directories and files

To create directories we can use the `mkdir`-command and to create some files we will use the `touch` command. We will use the `cd` command to change from one directory to another.

```bash
ubuntu@myinstance:~$ mkdir mydata
ubuntu@myinstance:~$ cd mydata/
ubuntu@myinstance:~/mydata$ touch datafile1.txt datafile2.dat logfile3.log
ubuntu@myinstance:~/mydata$ ls
datafile1.txt  datafile2.dat  logfile3.log
```

Much better `ls` result!

### Move directories and files

You can move files and directories using the `mv` command. Just specify the file and the new name you want it to have like in this example. Not the expert use of the`cd` and  `ls` commands again. And two more things: `.` is used to indicate *the current directory*
and `..` to indicate _the relative parent directory_ otherwise known as *one directory up*. See it in action in the transcript below. Note the comments (after the `#` characters) describing each action.

```bash
ubuntu@myinstance:~/mydata$ cd .. #move one directory up
ubuntu@myinstance:~$ ls #list files in current directory
mydata
ubuntu@myinstance:~$ mv mydata/logfile3.log ./ #move file to ./
ubuntu@myinstance:~$ ls #list files and dirs
logfile3.log  mydata
ubuntu@myinstance:~$ mv mydata researchdata #use mv to rename dir
ubuntu@myinstance:~$ ls #list files and dirs
logfile3.log  researchdata
ubuntu@myinstance:~$ ls researchdata/ #list files in specific dir
datafile1.txt  datafile2.dat
```

### Removing files 

At the end of any whirlwind demonstration, it is a good idea to tidy up after ourselves. So we will remove the files and directories we created. We can use the `rm`-command to remove files, and the `rmdir` command to remove empty directories. We can use the `*` wildcard character to indicate multiple files.

```bash
ubuntu@myinstance:~$ ls #list files and dirs
logfile3.log  researchdata
ubuntu@myinstance:~$ rm logfile3.log #delete file in current dir
ubuntu@myinstance:~$ ls #list files and dirs
researchdata
ubuntu@myinstance:~$ rm researchdata/* # delete all files in subdir
ubuntu@myinstance:~$ ls researchdata/ # list files in subdir (empty)
ubuntu@myinstance:~$ rmdir researchdata/ # delete subdir
ubuntu@myinstance:~$ ls #list files and dirs (empty)
ubuntu@myinstance:~$
```

### man and --help

There are many ways to interact with the file system on your instance. The examples above are merely a very brief introduction.  if you're uncertain about the exact working of a command, you can call on help straight from your command line. Try these two commands:

```bash
$ man ls
```

(use `space` to scroll, `q` to exit to the command prompt)

and 

```bash
ls --help
```

Most commands have some form of help included in one of these ways. Try the `man`-pages (short for *manual pages*) for some of the other commands we used above, e.g. `man ls` or `man touch`. 



## Installing and Updating software

Duration: 20:00

### Elevating privileges using `sudo`

For some actions on your instance, including installing and updating software, you need system administrator privileges, also known as *root*, *root*-privileges, *superuser*-privileges or *sudo*-privileges. The default user accounts on Nectar images are all configured to have *sudo*-privileges. To demonstrate, run the following command:

```bash
ubuntu@myinstance:~$ apt update #attempt to check for software updates
```

you should get errors similar to these:

```bash
Reading package lists... Done
E: Could not open lock file /var/lib/apt/lists/lock - open (13: Permission denied)
E: Unable to lock directory /var/lib/apt/lists/
W: Problem unlinking the file /var/cache/apt/pkgcache.bin - RemoveCaches (13: Permission denied)
W: Problem unlinking the file /var/cache/apt/srcpkgcache.bin - RemoveCaches (13: Permission denied)
```

To perform the `apt update` action we need to *elevate* to *sudo*-privileges. We can do this using the `sudo` utility command. From `man sudo`:

```
DESCRIPTION
	sudo allows a permitted user to execute a command as the superuser
```

The correct way then to execute the `apt update`, using the `sudo` elevation command is (output truncated below):

```bash
ubuntu@myinstance:~$ sudo apt update

Get:1 ...
...
...
Fetched 4591 kB in 8s (571 kB/s)
Reading package lists... Done
Building dependency tree
Reading state information... Done
3 packages can be upgraded. Run 'apt list --upgradable' to see them.
```

In summary: the default accounts on Nectar images have administrator privileges aka *sudo*-privileges. You access the *sudo*-privileges by prefixing your commands with `sudo` utility command. 

### Updating installed software

In the section above you learnt about admin-privileges and `sudo`. You are now ready to update the software installed on your machine. 

Ubuntu and debian machines come with the `apt` (**a**dvanced **p**ackage **t**ool) package manager software. The command you used above check whether any of the packages you have installed need updating. The command to apply any of those updates is separate and very similar. You will see them side by side often, so here they are side-by-side. Note that the upgrade command as shown is interactive: you need to answer the question/s it asks. (Output truncated below).

```bash
$ sudo apt update
...
$ sudo apt upgrade
Reading package lists... Done
Building dependency tree
Reading state information... Done
Calculating upgrade... Done
The following packages will be upgraded:
  base-files libinput-bin libinput10
3 upgraded, 0 newly installed, 0 to remove and 0 not upgraded.
Need to get 157 kB of archives.
After this operation, 0 B of additional disk space will be used.
Do you want to continue? [Y/n] y
...
```

Your instance will now show you a lot of logging information about the software it is downloading and upgrading. These upgrades often include security-related upgrades to your software and operating system. You should run an `apt update` and `apt upgrade` regularly. 

### Installing new software

Installing new software, much like updating existing software, uses both `sudo` and `apt`.Try this example (output truncated below):

```bash
$ sudo apt install fortune-mod
Reading package lists... Done
Building dependency tree
Reading state information... Done
The following additional packages will be installed:
  fortunes-min librecode0
Suggested packages:
  fortunes
The following NEW packages will be installed:
  fortune-mod fortunes-min librecode0
0 upgraded, 3 newly installed, 0 to remove and 0 not upgraded.
Need to get 621 kB of archives.
After this operation, 2131 kB of additional disk space will be used.
Do you want to continue? [Y/n]
...
```

After you have installed `fortune-mod` your instance has gained the powers of *interesting adage* and *random epigram*.
From `man fortune`:

```bash
NAME
   fortune - print a random, hopefully interesting, adage
DESCRIPTION
   When fortune is run with no arguments it prints out a random epigram. 
```

Try it:

```bash
$ fortune
```

I you would like to see the next few *random epigrams* from `fortune`, but you would not like to retype the command, you can use the up-arrow while at your command prompt. The up-arrow navigates to the previous commands in your command history. 

positive
: Installing software
The basic `apt` way of installing software is not the only way to install software. You'll find installation instructions for your software from your vendors and repositories. 

## Next Steps

Duration: 2:00

In this tutorial you learnt some basic navigation and manipulation of the filesystem on your instance via the command line. You also learnt how to upgrade existing software and install new software and you learnt that *sudo* will elevate your *sudo*-privileged accounts to do such administrator tasks.

You can learn much more about the shell, bash or the command line from the web, but with the skills learnt here, you'll be all set to complete our Nectar tutorials. 